hello and
welcome to this episode of night sky
news for january 2021 with me
astrophysicist dr becky smith this is
the show where we chat about everything
that you should look out for
in the night sky in the coming months
and we chat about what's been happening
in
space news in the past month so without
any further ado
let's kick things off and start by
looking up
right so there's so much to see in the
night sky
in the minute especially in the northern
hemisphere with these long
winter nights we've got this ample
opportunity to look out for things at
least if the weather is kind to us
anyway but if you've never stargazed
before if you've never looked at the
night sky before it can be a little bit
overwhelming you're not sure what you're
actually looking at or looking
for so i've got a couple of tips for you
you know just to be able to
spot things a little bit more easily
using something that's very
easy to find which is the moon it's
beautiful isn't it
the moon so on january 22nd and january
23rd
there's going to be a half moon which
will be very close to the star cluster
pleiades it's going to be high in the
sky towards the south
from sunset to the wee hours of the
morning and pilates is a fantastic sight
even with the naked eye
it looks sort of like six to eight stars
all clustered together in the shape of
sort of like
a little mini plow or mini big dipper
whatever you call it
but if you have telescopes or binoculars
and you can look at it through that
then it'll look even more spectacular
more stars
will appear as well in this tiny place
on the sky where they've all formed
very close together i got some new
binoculars for christmas as well and i'm
so
excited to probably try them out
especially on parties we've had so
many nights of cloud through the end of
december and beginning of january i'm
starting to get a little bit frustrated
i've not even had a chance to test them
out
with my tripod yet these are the um the
mead astro 15 by
70s so they're gonna give me such a
spectacular sight and you know that i'll
be breaking them out for pilates this
weekend
then as the month goes on the moon's
gonna be moving across the background
stars into the middle of what's known as
the winter hexagon
or the winter circle it's six of the
brightest stars in the winter sky that
essentially
ring the constellation of orion if you
start at orion's belt and move
down to orion's foot that's rigel then
you go across to sirius the dog star
up to prusayan up to pollux to capella
right at the top back down to the
reddish star
aldebron and finally joining back up to
rigel again and it's known as the winter
hexagon just because it's
so obvious in the winter sky you know
it's visible
from right after sunset all the way
through till around about midnight when
it sets depending on you know where you
are on the earth what your latitude
is and once you've spotted it near orion
like you can't help but see it again
every time you look in that direction so
if you want to add it to your stargazing
repertoire then on january 25th which is
a monday it's burns night as well
head outside find the moon and then just
go from there and see if you can spot
it then by the time february 10th comes
around the moon will no longer be a half
moon but it will be in its crescent or
toenail moon phase as i like to call it
invisible in the east
just before sunrise and on february 10th
it will be joined by the wonderful site
of jupiter
venus and saturn all in a row on the sky
for half an hour or so before sunrise
venus is the one in the middle and it
will be
the brightest about six times brighter
than jupiter which is the
next brightest and then saturn now these
are going to be quite low
on the horizon so you need a really
clear view eastwards to be able to see
this so if you can't usually see the sun
actually peak above the horizon for the
sunrise
you're probably not going to be able to
see this so those of you on eastern
coasts or
in apartment blocks with windows facing
east perhaps that are quite high up or
perhaps just
isolated on a hill in the countryside
you guys are going to have the best
chance plus all of you that are further
south as well the further south you are
and the closer you are to the tropic of
capricorn they're going to look higher
in the sky before sunrise whereas here
in the uk
they're probably not going to get high
enough above the horizon before the sun
rises four is actually
to be able to see this which means
probably
also gonna miss the conjunction of
jupiter and venus here in the uk as well
which is happening a day later on the
11th again just before sunrise in
the east now conjunction is when two
planets look very close together on the
sky i
they're not actually close together in
real life in the solar system but
from earth's perspective they look close
together now jupiter and venus are going
to get within about 0.4 degrees of each
other on february 11th
so if you hold your thumb out in front
of you that's about
half a degree so that's about the
distance they're going to be
separated by it's about the distance of
a full moon
on the sky so not as close together as
jupiter and saturn came in the great
conjunction we just had in
december but still pretty close together
again those of you at most of the
latitudes are going to have a better
view of this because they're going to be
higher in the sky before the sun rises
whereas those of us at more normally
latitudes are probably going to struggle
probably only going to be able to pick
out
venus against the sort of brightening
background sky from the sunrise
jupiter's probably just going to be
a bit washed out to be honest but
wherever you are in the world if you do
manage to catch this or any of the
things i've talked about this
month then please send me your pictures
on social media i always want to see
them
and i'll share a few of my favorites all
right that's enough for looking up let's
come back down to earth with a bump
and let's chat about what's been
happening in space news
in the past month
all right let's kick things off with
some good news about the arecibo
telescope in puerto rico remember last
month there was the really
bad news that it had collapsed due to
structural damage
well in late december the puerto rican
governor juan de vazquez garcia
allocated eight million dollars to
rebuild
the telescope stating that the collapse
presented an opportunity
to redesign the 60 year old radio
telescope in order to make it relevant
and useful
to the scientific community for decades
to come
i've won um thrilled at this news
because i mean the rc broke telescope
was an absolute legend in astronomy and
astrophysics so
to see it get written off after the
collapse was just really really
heartbreaking so i mean i'm excited for
what's to come see it get rebuilt i'm
excited for sort of the liaison that's
going to happen
sort of in the astronomical community to
say well what do we need
now what do we think we're going to need
in the future as well in terms of a new
telescope
i'm excited to see where that will lead
and i
know that you know no rebuilding is is
going to happen anytime soon it's going
to be a long drawn out process but
i am really looking forward to the day
when i can say that i am working
with new data from the rsc world
telescope again
all right so i had loads of stories that
i wanted to talk about this week but as
usual
not enough time so if you want to hear
about jax's plans to put up a wooden
satellite into space or you want to hear
about the rumors of
the strange radio signal that's coming
from proxima centauri the sun's
closest star then head over to my
youtube stories and my instagram stories
to check those out they'll be going up
at
some point in this weekend but i'll also
save them to a highlight on my instagram
profile so any of you you know watching
in the future
won't miss out either i've also saved
a story on some research that's come out
um with evidence against
dark matter and for mond one of these
modified
theories of gravity but i'm planning to
give that a
whole video of its own to do it justice
to explain it fully about why it's so
exciting and what they've
found so look out for that coming out
next
thursday on my channel but for now let's
talk about the fact that we now have
a new most distant galaxy
ever found in gn zed
11. so a red shift of around about 11 as
the name suggests actually 10.957 plus a
bit of measurement error
which means the universe was only 450
million years old when that light was
emitted from that galaxy and started on
it's journey to us it's only about
three percent of the universe's current
age around about 13.8
billion years old so it means that the
galaxy was at a distance of about 13.4
billion light years when the light was
emitted but of course the universe has
expanded since then meaning that the
galaxy is
now 32 billion light years away
now for a couple years now people have
suspected that this might be the most
distant galaxy ever detected because it
was spotted
dropping out of hubble space telescope
images now that happens for
a couple of reasons because of what
happens to light
on its way to us from distance galaxies
so the first thing that happens to light
is that it gets
redshifted by the expansion of the
universe
essentially the wavelength of the light
is stretched and more stretched waves
are redder colours so everything gets
stretched to redder colours even down
into the very long infrared wavelengths
the second thing that happens to light
is that it passes through clouds of
hydrogen gas that just happen to be
on its path from the distant galaxy to
us when that happens the hydrogen gas
actually absorbs a little bit of that
line it always absorbs the exact same
color
or wavelength the combination of those
two things
means that you know the light passes
through one kind of hydrogen gas
and loses uh the little bit of light at
that specific
color it then gets red shifted some more
until it passes through another bit of
hydrogen gas on the cloud of hydrogen
gas
and then it loses some more light from
light that wasn't absorbed before
because it wasn't the red
the right wavelength but has since been
red shifted to the right wavelength
and therefore gets absorbed and the
combination of both of those things
overall means that
anything with a shorter wavelength so
bluer of that specific color that's
absorbed by that hydrogen gas
essentially gets completely lost on the
journey from the distant galaxy
to us so picking out where that complete
drop off of light actually happens
allows you to work out the redshift that
very distant galaxy and therefore work
out how far away
it is but the thing is there's actually
a limit to the most distant thing the
hubble space telescope can pick
out because that drop off eventually
gets redshifted and redshifted and
redshifted some more
until it's actually beyond the limit
that the hubble space telescope can
detect it's been redshifted so far
that it's gone way into the infrared and
beyond the
limits of the infrared light that the
hubble space telescope is actually
sensitive to so this is why people are
so
excited for the launch of the james webb
space telescope later
this year fingers crossed anyway which
is sensitive to
longer wavelengths down into the
infrared so this is why you hear
astronomers saying that james webb space
telescope will actually be able to see
further because it will be able to
detect the only light that's actually
left from these distant galaxies that
hasn't been absorbed by hydrogen
on its way to us so this galaxy gn-z11
it been known for a while that the
redshift was around about redshift 11
but we didn't know that very
precisely because of the way that we
pick out these distant galaxies from the
data taken by the hubble space telescope
so ideally what you would do is you
would take a spectrum of a galaxy where
you take the light and you split it
through a prism
and then you can make a nice graph of
how much light every single wavelength
you're receiving and then you see that
drop off very clearly
hubble doesn't do that instead what
hubble does is it takes lots of
different images
of the galaxy through filters that only
let through a specific
range in wavelengths and so a certain
range of wavelengths you don't see
anything and then all of a sudden
the the redder range of wavelengths you
do see something
and you can tell that drop-off occurs in
a specific
range but not precisely
where it is actually happening but a
study this month
led by xiang and collaborators did
actually take
a spectra using the keck telescopes on
the summit of mauna kea
in hawaii and this allowed them to
measure the redshift
so much more precisely at you know
10.957 plus or minus a little bit of
measurement error
still and confirmed you know what people
had long suspected that gnz11
was the most distant galaxy from earth
that we
have ever observed all right sticking
with galaxies we're coming a little bit
closer to home i want to talk about this
galaxy that's been spotted that's
burping out
46 of its entire supply of gas
at a rate of 10 000 suns worth per year
this has been found by poglesi and
collaborators in a galaxy which has been
classed as a
starburst that's a galaxy that's
recently formed
a truckload of stars in a relatively
short amount of time now you can imagine
a hundred
thousand years or so down the line
you've got all of these
massive hot stars running out of fuel
and therefore dying and going supernova
in pretty quick
succession and that can cause this huge
drive outwards of a lot of material
from the galaxy essentially removing a
lot of the gas
that you need to make new stars
and that's a process that we call
quenching i.e
we quench the stars from forming we we
stop stars from forming in a galaxy by
some process either by removing the gas
or heating up the gas or preventing that
gas being used
in some way this is actually what i do
as part of my research but i look at how
black holes like growing black holes
could actually
cause this i've done a video on how you
killed a galaxy before if you want to
check that out and i'll link it
up here now at first proglesian
collaborators thought this big outflow
of gas that they detected just with a
slight different redshift to the stars
in the galaxy so they knew that it was
moving at a different speed and
outflowing from the galaxy
they thought it was caused by all of
these supernova going off
at once but they also found evidence
that galaxy is recovering
after a big merger with another galaxy
you can sort of see this in the
radio images that it's still disturbed
and so what they ended up concluding was
that it was that merger of two galaxies
in the past that have you know
left behind this remnant galaxy that we
see today that triggered both the star
burst or the galaxy formed a truckload
of stars all at once
and also this flinging out of gas
from the galaxy not by a load of
supernova going off at once
but through the gravitational
interactions that
tore apart those two galaxies as they
merged together
and ended up flinging out nearly half of
all the galaxy's gas
out into intergalactic space all right
one last thing for all of you who are
still with me who remembers my
beloved planet nine this purely
hypothetical planet thought to be
orbiting the sun
way beyond the orbit of pluto the
existence of which has been suggested to
explain
the shepherding of some of the orbits of
the asteroids and dwarf planets
way out on the edge of the solar system
now it's a purely hypothetical planet
because we haven't actually
detected yet but if it did exist it
would very nicely explain some of the
weird things that we see out on the edge
of the solar system so
people estimate that you know it's
probably around about five to ten times
the mass of earth and
at the distance it is it would probably
take about 400 to 800 years to finish an
orbit around the sun so it's really far
out and there's
loads of ideas for how it could have got
there from you know being a planet that
formed very close in the sun and then
being flung out
to you know being a rogue planet that
was wandering into stellar space and
then got captured by the sun's
gravity some people even suggested the
reason that we haven't spotted it yet is
because it's actually a tiny black hole
the size of a tennis ball
and that's my personal favorite theory
but now we've found a planet nine
like thing in another star system making
the idea that the solar system
has a planet nine like thing that bit
more
likely now this work was done by juan de
rosa and kalas
using hubble space telescope images of
the star hd106906
over 14 years to try and spot any
planets that were orbiting around it in
that time
so they found a planet around about 11
times the mass of jupiter orbiting at a
distance 737 times the distance
from the earth the sun from its star
now at that mass at 11 times the mass of
jupiter you're very close
to the limit at which you go from being
a planet to being
a star at 13 times the mass of jupiter
that's the limit at when you can
start nuclear fusion in the core and
therefore you start producing your
energy and you become classed
as a star so around about 11
masses of jupiter you're not quite in
that gray
area of planimos which i've done a video
on before
where you know is it a failed star or is
it just a really heavy planet but the
authors of this paper do state that it
is
planetary mass sized so there's a lot of
similarities between the you know the
suspected properties
of the hypothetical planet nine in the
solar system and this newly discovered
planet hd106906
b but it's the differences that got
people excited because the star that
this newly discovered planet is orbiting
around is very different to the sun
first of all it's a binary star
but also it's much much younger than the
sun it's like an astronomical
spring chicken in comparison at only
about 50 million years old come with
that with the sun's
4.5 billion years old and you'll see
what i mean
so the fact that something like this has
already formed or been captured if it
was a
rogue planet you know roaming
interstellar space
in such a short space of time of only 50
million
years is really interesting so by
studying this system further it'll help
us nail down our ideas of
how an object like this might have
formed
in the solar system at some point and
maybe
just maybe help us finally
find the elusive planet nine
and finally a quick shout out to the
live stream i'm organizing and hosting
for oxford physics next thursday the
28th of january from 3 p.m until 9 00 pm
uk time i've convinced all of my
colleagues to give talks about their
research
and to take part in some q a panels as
well so get thinking of all of your good
space questions
plus we've got kid-friendly activities
from three until 6 p.m
for everyone homeschooling at the moment
as well the link is
in the description and i'll see you
there before we get to the bloopers i
just want to thank this week's video
sponsor
brilliant brilliant is a website or an
app that makes learning
interactive accessible and most
importantly
fun they are all about visualizing
concepts really
seeing them and interacting with that
content so you're much more likely to
actually remember
what you've learned so if you want to
learn more about how
we detect planets around other stars in
the milky way
through transit so how they make their
stars wobble
then check out the sections of their
fantastic
astronomy course which covers all the
basics in such an engaging way honestly
these courses are so so good so if that
sounds like something that you want to
start doing this year and you want to
support me
and my channel then head to
brilliant.org forward slash
dr becky that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y
and sign up completely for free
plus the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20
off an annual premium subscription so
you can just
learn away learn anything that your
heart desires so thank you so much to
brilliant for that
and now roll those bloopers
first up on the 22nd and 23rd of january
the moon is gonna be very close to the
star custer plat
custer the star custard
[Music]
yummy it's a really nice sort of
comforting sight to be able to spot
every winter so if you want to sort of
add that to your stargazing repertoire
repertoire the puerto rican governor
wanda vazquez said
wonder vasquez
where is my phone there i found it
infrared so this is why you'll hear i
should always say that the james webb's
first hope
didn't can't find planet nine rarer than
the glimmer of a comet in the sky
cause it could be a black hole long
story short we couldn't find